[MUSIC PLAYING]
JEREMY: Do you want to
know something upsetting?
Programs fail.
Yes, computation
often goes wrong.
Haskell provides
several mechanisms
for handling
computations that fail.
The first-- probably the
simplest such mechanism--
is called Maybe.
Let's think about how a
computation might fail.
Imagine trying to
process a list somehow.
Say, take the first
element of the list.
And you are given an empty list.
There isn't any first element.
Or imagine dividing two
integers and the divisor is 0.
We need a way to
capture whether or not
such a computation has succeeded
or whether it's failed.
This is the job of Maybe.
Let's have a look
at this data type.
It's defined in the
Haskell prelude.
The standard
library for Haskell.
So here I am in Google.
I'm going to type in
Haskell prelude and Maybe.
Wait for the results.
And the first hit
is the Hackage site
which is the official
documentation for the Haskell
platform.
Let's click on that.
And here we are.
Documentation for the
prelude standard module.
Let's search in here for Maybe.
Here we are.
And we see that Maybe
represents or encapsulates
an optional value.
So the value might either
be Just a, for some a.
Or it's empty which is Nothing.
The documentation goes
on to say, using Maybe
is a good way to deal with
errors or exceptional cases.
So these are the
type constructors.
Either Nothing or Just a.
We can look at the
source as well.
Let's click here and have a
look at the source for Maybe.
And this is very familiar to
us as an algebraic data type.
Similar to the ones that
we defined earlier on
in the course.
Maybe is either
Nothing or Just a.
For the type variable a.
And again, we have
these two type classes
that Maybe derives.
Eq for equality.
And Ord for comparison.
Right.
Let's have a play with Maybe.
Imagine we want a
function to find
the maximum value in the list.
Perhaps a list of integers.
Let's start off by defining
the maxhelper routine.
So maxhelper is going to take
an integer value which is
the maximum we've seen so far.
And an integer list
which is the rest
of the list we still
have to process
to look to the maximum value.
And it's going to
return an int, which
is the maximum value
over the whole list.
So maxhelper.
If we're given an
interim maximum
and there's nothing
else left to look at,
the list just returns x.
That is the maximum.
Maxhelper with an interim value
x and a nonempty input list
is going to call
itself recursively.
And the interim
maximum is either
going to be x or y depending
on which one is larger.
And then we'll process
the rest of the list.
So let's just try this
code to see if it works.
Sorry.
I'm going to start an
interactive prompt inside
my emacs session and
I"m going to run ghci.
And I'm going to
load max.hs which
is where that code is stored.
So I can say type maxhelper.
There we go there.
And I can run it-- maxhelper.
So if I give it a
value to an empty list,
it should return that
value as the maximum.
If I give it a value that's
small, then I give it the list.
Right.
I've said minus 1.
So I need to put
that inside brackets.
That's interpreted correctly
as an integer value.
So maxhelper with an interim
maximum of minus 1 and a list
1, 2, 3 returns 3, and so on.
Let's go back to
the source code now
and define a second function,
which is called maxfromlist.
This is only going to
take an integer list
and it's going to return the
maximum value in that list.
It's going to use maxhelper
to find the maximum value.
So maxfromlist.
If it's supplied with an empty
list what's it going to return?
I've got a problem here.
There is no maximum to return.
So let's return nothing.
And let's say our return type
has now become Maybe int.
Because we can only return
an int if there is a maximum.
And if there isn't, we'll
have to return Nothing.
Maxfromlist.
If there are
elements in list then
it's going to return maxhelper.
I need an equal sign there.
Sorry.
Equals maxhelper x.
The interim maximum xs--
the rest of the list.
And I need to wrap this
up inside the Maybe.
So I need to say it's going to
return Just this integer value.
Good.
So let's go back to
our ghci session.
And let's say, reload.
Which will reload the
edited max.hs source code.
And now I should be able
to say maxfromlist 1 2, 3,
And that returns Just 3.
Good.
If I say maxfromlist empty
list it returns Nothing.
Great.
This works fine.
The Maybe type means
that the type checker
guarantees client code will check
the result of the computation.
Probably with a case expression.
This is much more robust
than C error codes.
Right.
Once we've generated
Maybe values,
how do we propagate
them in programs?
Perhaps by using lots
of case statements.
But surely there
must be a better way.
And there is.
At this point I will
mumble the word monads.
But we'll cover these in
more detail in week six.
For now let me show you how you
can map functions over Maybe
values.
So let's say let function
inc equals one plus.
So the type of inc in the
context of the type variable a
that is an instance of
the number type class.
Then inc takes an
a and returns an a.
So if I say inc 1 it
returns the value 2.
How about if I say inc Just 1?
Look.
It doesn't work.
So inc can't be applied
to Maybe values.
However, if I use
the fmap function--
this is a higher order
function here-- inc Just 1.
I get back Just 2.
So fmap allows inc to be applied
to the value inside the Maybe.
The 1 inside the Just 1.
Fmap inc Just 2 returns Just 3.
And now you're
saying, what happens
if I apply inc 2 Nothing?
Guess.
I get back Nothing.
Great.
Let's leave Maybes
there for now.
We'll come back
to them and monads
in general later in the course.
Thanks.
Bye.
[MUSIC PLAYING]